ADR: Switching from rem to em units (#539)
CleverCloud/clever-components: docs/adr/adr-0021-from-rem-to-em.md

---
kind: '📌 Docs/Architecture Decision Records'
---
# ADR 0021: Switching from rem to em units

🗓️ 2022-08-29 · ✍️ Florian Sanders

## The context

Since the beginning of this component library, we've been using relative units for almost everything in our CSS.

### Using relative units for font size

Users can set their base font size through the Operating System settings and the browser settings as well.
However, this setting may be completely ignored by some browsers when the website font sizes have been set using fixed units like `px`. 
This is the case with Chrome for instance, where font sizes in `px` remain the same whatever base font size you select in the settings.

Users can still Zoom, but they would have to do it on every single website they are viewing.
Usually, when people truly need bigger characters, they want to specify the size once for instance from the Operating System settings. They expect it to be applied everywhere, including the browser interface and every website they visit.

### Using relative units for everything else

Using relative font sizes is not enough because when the text gets bigger, containers should also get bigger.

> If not, then the text will overflow and may very well become unreadable.

Reviewer: I feel like the "very well" is not necessary

Author: You're right, I'll remove it :+1:

This is why we also used relative units for every size (`padding`, `margin`, `border`, etc.).

We introduced a few exceptions for some `border` and `box-shadow` styles when it did not make sense to make them scale with the font size.

### Choosing the relative unit

There are several [relative units in CSS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/Values_and_units#relative_length_units) but in most cases it comes down to two options:

* `em` which is based on the font size of the parent for typographical properties (`font-size` for instance) and the element itself for other properties (`width`, `height`, etc.).
* `rem` which is based on the font size set on the root element (the `<html>` tag).

We chose to use the `rem` unit because it felt like it was the simplest to use.
It allowed us to use a unit that we assumed would always be computed to the same value across all our components.

## The problem

> We faced issues with two websites that modify the root font size used by the `rem` unit.
> 
> In our private admin dashboard, the root font size is specified like this:
> 
> ```css
> html {
>   font-size: 62.5%;
> }
> ```
> 
> In our Documentation Website, the root font size is specified like this:
> 
> ```css
> html {
>   font-size: 10px;
> }
> ```
> 
> The goal of this is generally to simplify the conversion from `px` to `rem`.
> This way, developers only have to divide the size in pixels by 10 to get the corresponding `rem` size as explained in [The Surprising Truth about Pixels and Accessibility by Josh W Comeau](https://www.joshwcomeau.com/css/surprising-truth-about-pixels-and-accessibility/#the-625-trick).
> 
> For instance, `16px` equals to `1.6rem`. 
> 
> The issue is that our components were built assuming that `16px` equals to `1rem` because it's the standard.
> This means our components looked a lot smaller on these two websites.
> 
> One of the key principles of our Web Components is that they can be used in almost any context.
> Using `rem` units clearly fails this principle because they rely on a root font size they cannot control.

Reviewer 2: This is just a suggestion to clarify a few points, you can adjust anything you want ;-)

```suggestion
While trying to use our components, we faced issues with two of our websites that modify the root font size used by the `rem` unit.

In our private admin dashboard, the root font size is specified like this:

```css
html {
  font-size: 62.5%;
}
```

It's not a bad practice as it still respect the user's settings but it completely breaks any third party CSS based on rems.

In our documentation website, the root font size is specified like this:

```css
html {
  font-size: 10px;
}
```

This is clearly a bad practice as it completely ignores the user's settings.
Sadly, this practice is not that uncommon on the web.

In both cases, the goal is generally to simplify the conversion from `px` to `rem`.
This way, developers only have to divide the size in pixels by 10 to get the corresponding `rem` size as explained in [The Surprising Truth about Pixels and Accessibility by Josh W Comeau](https://www.joshwcomeau.com/css/surprising-truth-about-pixels-and-accessibility/#the-625-trick).

For instance, `16px` equals to `1.6rem`. 

The issue is that our components were built assuming that `1rem` would either be equal to `16px`, the default in most browsers or a value set by the user.
In these two situations, `1rem` is equal to `10px` so our components looked a lot smaller on these two websites.

One of the key principles of our Web Components is that they can be used in almost any context.
Using `rem` units clearly fails this principle because they rely on a root font size they cannot control.
```

For instance:
```css
--cc-font-size-xs: 0.9em;
```

The `em` unit defeats the goal of this kind of design tokens since its value will not be the same across all our components, depending on whether another `font-size` has been set on the element or its parent.

## The wish list

The ideal solution would be a relative unit which computed value would remain the same between all of our Web Components. The base value could be overridden from our theme for instance.

Reading through this [cancelled proposal for a 'hem' CSS unit relative to the host element font size](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/7613) and the [proposal for CSS Custom Units](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/7379), it seems like custom units could be a better fit for our context than `em` but this is clearly long term planning as it is still being discussed.

We will continue to follow the progress on this subject.

## Resources:

* [The Surprising Truth about Pixels and Accessibility by Josh W Comeau](https://www.joshwcomeau.com/css/surprising-truth-about-pixels-and-accessibility/#the-625-trick),

> * About using relative units, in French, <a href="https://www.lalutineduweb.fr/accessibilite-personne-ne-le-fait/" lang="fr">Accessibilité : personne ne le fait donc on s’en fiche</a>.

Reviewer 2: Can we add two resources that I really like about ems:

* https://nicolas-hoizey.com/talks/2013/10/10/un-petit-pas-pour-l-em-un-grand-pas-pour-le-web/
* https://nicolas-hoizey.com/articles/2016/03/02/people-don-t-change-the-default-16px-font-size-in-their-browser/
